ΡΙΗΔΕΒ. xvn

some construetione, and tho want ot taste, which in the
amplifications belonging to the versisser, prevents him [rom
stopping at the proper point, one must own that this poem
exhihits more variety oi style and is more entertaining to
peruse than Wace's Brut, leaving apart however the interest
inseparahle {rom the primitive monuments oi our language.
ln comparing both, any body may very easily convince
himself that the old trouvere has almost everywhere more
closely followed Geffrey ol· Monmouth's chronicle than the
Latin poet did. lt seems to us most likely that hoth ot them
drew their narratives from the same source, that is to say
from the Latin chronicle ottho Welsh Benedictine monk, ra·
ther than {rom the Brut y Brenhinoedd oi Walter Galen. One
might think thatthe discrepaneies between their compositions
and that of Geth-ey are owing tn a more immediate imitation
of some ot· those ancient Armorican poems, which had been
collected by the Arehdeaeon ol' Oxford; but that can only he
eonjectural, since those poenus are wanting. ln fact, although
the existence, or at least the amomi-auce, ot the popular
songs which preserved the legend of king Arthur and oi his
fabulons predecessore, seem attested hy the reeords o( the
middle ages, we should not dare, in spite os the researches
ot many industrious scholars, to boast oi possessing the
original texts ot those early poems, or even some xragment
ot real authenticity.

As we have said before, the text or the '³ Gesta regum Bri-
tanniae” is rar trum being correct, and too often both the
quantity and the metre are defective ; we have not however

